---
layout: post
title: Welcome and Introductions
date: 2020-05-05 10:52 -0400
description: A prelude to what I hope to accomplish with this blog.
image: 
category: 
tags: [method, writing, video games]
published: false
sitemap: true
---
Welcome to "Open + Worlds," a personal blog that explores the intersections of art and life.

In the coming weeks, I plan to publish blog posts on literature, video games, food, and culture more broadly. I hope to use this space as a repository of ideas for future essays, where I can experiment with avenues of thought before committing them to writing.

d

> IN 1976, THE ROCK JOURNALIST Nik Cohn published “Tribal Rites of the New Saturday Night,” a New York magazine article about the Brooklyn disco scene that would become “Saturday Night Fever.” The inspiration for the film’s Tony Manero was a teenager Cohn called Vincent. During the week, Vincent sold paint at a hardware store. But on Saturday nights, he transformed into “the very best dancer in Bay Ridge,” the boy who ruled the 2001 Odyssey club like “a medieval seigneur.” Cohn’s story made John Travolta a movie star and turned the Odyssey into a hot spot. Twenty years later, Cohn admitted that he had fabricated the whole scene.
> What really happened was this: Cohn turned up outside the Odyssey, some guy threw up on his pants, so he went back to Manhattan and made something up. That’s the thing about Saturday night — it’s a time of mythic potential and mundane reality. It’s a fantasy space that only opens at the height of the weekend. Nestled protectively between two days free from work, it represents the fleeting opportunity for pure self-fulfillment. It’s the night when we can make ourselves believe that anything could happen, even though it hardly ever does.

The blog takes its name from open-world games, a genre of video games where the player can move about and explore the virtual world freely. In the last decade alone, there's been an explosion of open-world games, from *The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild* to *Skyrim* and *Red Dead Redemption 2*. Some video games---like the RPG (role-playing game) series *Final Fantasy* and the strategy series *Civilization*---incorporate elements of open-world design into their gameplay. Other games, like *Super Mario Odyssey*, shift between open-world and platform mechanics. As with any genre, there are always outliers and edge cases that muddy the waters of categorization.

Open-world games are often contrasted with side-scrolling and platform games, which have stricter limitations on movement and story progression. The opposite of open world, then, is something like linearity or structure or determination. This comparison isn't perfect, though, least of all because the concept of "freedom" in open-world games is, as I've [written](https://www.publicbooks.org/games-for-a-fallen-world/) in the past, often idealized rather than actual. The comparison also simplifies and erases a wide, varied landscape of video-game design. Yet, the comparison is a useful point of departure because it makes form---as a mechanic, as a set of conventions, as a system for structuring plot development---critical to our experience of a game. "Open world," then, describes how form guides experience. In future posts, I will develop this idea further. For now, it's enough to say that the blog will explore how cultural forms shape the ways we experience and understand the present.

While the blog takes its title from video games, that is only a starting point. I was trained as Ph.D. in Victorian literature, and I'm invested in the study of literature, philosophy, and culture. At the same time---particularly as I have transitioned away from academia---my interests have grown more varied. I plan to write about literature and video games, as well as film, television, theory, and food (especially the politics of veganism). I don't see these areas of culture as necessarily discrete. As an academic I was trained to think synthetically, and I plan to make connections that are both obvious and surprising.
